#summary Glossary of HypergraphDB-Terminology and definitions for central classes

DISCLAIMER: this page is written by a User. It is not an "official" hypergraphDB document. It is as of yet, incomplete. 

=Atom=

=arity=
arity: The number of atoms a link points to. Nodes have an arity of zero.
=Compound Type=
=Dimension=
=incidence set=
The set of all links pointing to a given atom.

=HGAtomType=
Java classes implementing the HGAtomType interface are HypergraphDB types. 
A HGAtomType must provide:
- make(...): create instances of that type, i.e. deserializes from store into a runtime object. It's therefore an object factory.
- store(..): store
- release (... ): remove from store
- subsumes(A1, A2): define subsumption relationship, aka inheritance

=HGCompositeType=
The java interface to be implemented for record-style structures.


=Link=
=Projection=
=Record= 
=RecordType= 
=RecordTypeConstructor=
=Slot=
=target set=
The set of atoms a given link points to. 

=Type -general= 
“...plugging instructions. A term of a given type T is both something that can be plugged somewhere as well as a plug with free, typed variable" (Jean-Yves Girard)

=Type - HypergraphDB-specific= 
  1) A type is an atom capable of storing, constructing and removing runtime
representations of its instances to and from the primitive storage layer.  
  2) A type is capable, given two of its instances, to tell whether one of them can
be substituted for the other (subsumption relation). [http://www.hypergraphdb.org/docs/hypergraphdb.pdf ref]

The java class defining an hypergraphDB type must implement the HGAtomType interface.

=Type Constructor=