#summary Explanatation of HGDB application and the HGManagement API.

= What Are HGDB Applications? =

Those are simply collections of classes that rely on a HyperGraphDB instance to work and that are usually organized around a set of core atom types and cover some area or domain of interest. A few simple abstractions are defined in the [http://www.kobrix.com/javadocs/hgapps/management/index.html org.hypergraphdb.app.management ] package  to support this. 

The [http://www.kobrix.com/javadocs/hgapps/management/org/hypergraphdb/app/management/HGApplication.html HGApplication] class represents an application defined by a name and a version. Implementation must essentially implement the [http://www.kobrix.com/javadocs/hgapps/management/org/hypergraphdb/app/management/ PresenceLifecycle.html PresenceLifecycle] interface (from the same package) with methods install/uninstall/update/reset. 

Then there's a [http://www.kobrix.com/javadocs/hgapps/management/org/hypergraphdb/app/management/ HGManagement.html HGManagement] class that helps with managing applications in a HGDB instance with methods like `isInstalled`, `ensureInstalled` and `remove`. 

The general patterns for `HGApplication` implementations is to create the common HGDB types and whatever atoms are needed in the install method and be able to reverse this and cleanup the all data in the uninstall method. The other two methods, `update` and `reset`, are optional and will probably only be implemented when it is straightforward to do so.

= List of Existing HGDB Applications =

  * TuProlog
  * WordNet
  * TopicMaps
  * XmlSchema