#summary Collects bugs fixes and improvements made in the current dev cycle

  * Migration to Berkeley DB 11g Release 2
  * Made HGRelTypeConstructor into a HGComplexType so that relations can be found by name more easily.
  * Added the HGTransactionContext to the HGTransaction instances. Added the !HyperGraph instance to its associated HGTransactionContext.
  * Added a few more events for finer grained control of atom addition and replacement. Listeners can throw strongly-typed exceptions to abort the transaction.
  * Added collection and List based constructors for LinkCondition and OrderedLinkCondition respectively.
  * Added HGQuery.hg.atomAssert API for "insert ignore" semantics.
  * XMPP interface allows communicating with peers from a chat room only instead of having to manage every peer's roaster separately.
  * Added toString method to HGValueLink for tracing/debugging purposes.
  * Fixed a bug when removing a link with an empty target set.
  * Fixed a bug in SimpleALGenerator and DefaultALGenerator returning incorrect link when it changes.
  * Added HGUtils.dropHyperGraphInstance method to delete a HGDB instance from the filesystem
  * Implemented MVCC (snapshot isolation) transactions, which are now default.
  * Added size() method to HGCache interface and implementations.
  * EnumType supports indexing (i.e. enum properties can be indexed by)
  * Abstracted storage implementation into HGStoreImplementation interface
  * API Change: Abstracted persistent handle management - HGHandleFactory is now an interface rather than a class.
  * Added some more configuration options to HGConfiguration: 
    * max size of in-memory incidence sets - maxCachedIncidenceSetSize 
    * option to ignore system attributes (improves performance when set to false which is not the default!)
  * API Change: removed storage cache configuration option from HGConfiguration - this is not separately available from BDBStorageImplementation.getConfig() which returns BDBConfig.
  * Added 'goBeforeFirst' and 'goAfterLast' methods to HGRandomAccessResult interface.\
  * API Change: ALGenerator now returns a Pair<HGHandle, HGHandle> result set holding both the link to the adjacent atom and the atom itself, while the getCurrentLink method was removed.
  * Added HGHandleHolder, similar to HGGraphHolder - atoms implementating this interface will have their own handle managed as a bean property by a HyperGraph instance (set during add/load/replace).
  * Added Date related primitive types for storing java.util.Date, java.sql.Date, java.sql.Timestamp and java.util.Calendar - value are stored as longs in GMT according to the local time zone.
  * To construct HGLink Java beans, it is now possible to use constructors of the form A(HGHandle x, HGHandle y, ..., HGHandle z) in addition to the A(HGHandle [] targetSet) form. This makes it easier to name the actual link target arguments and improves code readability and Javadocs.
  * Added support for private default and link based constructors.