#summary Protege OWL Editor Plugin

= What Is It? =

The HGDB Protege Plugin integrates HyperGraphDB backed storage for OWL 2.0 ontologies with the popular Protege OWL editor (http://protege.stanford.edu/). The core features supported are:

  # Automatic ontology persistence in HyperGraphDB back-end. Import/Export from/to standard OWL textual formats. All modifications in the editor are automatically persisted in a transactional way. 
  # Versioning of ontologies at the axiom level - every axiom change is recorded and tracked and can be inspected and reverted. That is, version management support full history, commits, rollbacks, reverts etc. 
  # Team features include sharing ontologies on a common repository and managing versions following the Subversion model with a centralized location. Merging of change sets is supported, but branching is not available yet (planned for next release).
  # A few extra improvements to Protege itself that help dealing with large-scale ontologies such as search box for long lists of individuals or properties in some dialog boxes.

= Installation and Compatibility =

Protege itself is build on [http://www.osgi.org OSGI] and the plugin comes in the form of several bundles that you install simply by copying over in your Protege home installation directory. The downloads below are zip files that you can directly unzip into your protege home and restart protege:

  * *For Protege 4.3* - Protege HyperGraphDB Plugin version 1.8beta. This simply an upgrade to match recent changes to the OWLAPI (version 3.4.2) and Protege 4.3. No functional changes, just some bug fixes and improvements on the codebase.

  [http://hypergraphdb.org/downloads/ProtegeHGDBPlugin-1.7.0.zip download http://hypergraphdb.org/downloads/ProtegeHGDBPlugin-1.7.0.zip]

  * *For Protege 4.1* - Protege HyperGraphDB Plugin version 1.7. This is the last official stable release. Note that this version will replace some of the core Protege bundles upon installation. 

  [http://hypergraphdb.org/downloads/ProtegeHGDBPlugin-1.8-beta.zip download http://hypergraphdb.org/downloads/ProtegeHGDBPlugin-1.8-beta.zip]

= How to Use the Plugin =

A quick 5 minute screen cast will walk you through the menus and operations available: http://sharegov.org/protegehgdb/HGOWLScreencast3.mp4