Wordnet is a popular lexical database used in NLP (Natural Language Processing) research. Meaning in Wordnet is defined through _synsets_ - synonym sets that group together words with similar meaning. In addition, the database contains semantic relationships between synsets (e.g. type-token, whole-part etc.). More information can be found on 
the [http://wordnet.princeton.edu/ Wordnet home page at Princeton].

The HyperGraphDB Wordnet application (called henceforth HGWN) is essentially a representation of all the information from WordNet within HyperGraphDB. This includes support for:

  * Querying the DB for a given word.
  * Querying for specific semanthycal or lexical relationship of a given word
  * Morphological analysys - e.g. finding base form of  a given word or collocation

HGWN does not support the so called "polysemy count" - number of uses of a given word in a specific sense as obtained by analyzing several sample texts. This feature is absolete in WordNet too and is left unchanged since 2003.  

==Package Overview==

Main package: `org.hypergraphdb.app.wordnet`. All Wordnet related classes are to be found underneath this package.

JWNL configuration files are maintained in `org.hypergraph.app.wordnet.configuration`. They are only needed when Wordnet is initially loaded into HyperGraphDB.

The package `org.hypergraphdb.app.wordnet.data` contains classes implementing the core Wordnet representation and the package `org.hypergraphdb.app.wordnet.data.pointe` contains classes representing semantic relationships between synsets. Those are called pointers as in the original WordNet terminology.

==Representation Details==

Each word/lexeme is stored as an instance of the class `org.hypergraphdb.app.wordnet.data.Word`. Synsets are stored as instances one of the subclasses of`SynsetLink`. There is `SynsetLink` subclass for each part of speech. Thus noun senses are represented as instances of `NounSynsetLink`. Those are HyperGraphDB links with arbitrary arity >= 1. The original WordNet ID is stored as the `id` property of synsets and the sense definition (a dictionary style definition in plain english) is stored as the `gloss` property.

Pointers are relations between synsets. There are many types of pointers and they different according to the part of speech for which they are used. Refer to the various WordNet papers (links can be found on their homepage) for a description of the semantic theory behind. All pointers are defined as links between synsets in the package `org.hypergraphdb.app.wordnet.data.pointer`. Usually those links have arity 2 and most of them are ordered - for instance, hypernym links are ordered while the `Similar` pointer is not.

So essentially: the basic datum is a `Word`, its sense represented as a `SynsetLink` which is a link between words and semantic relationships with other senses is represented as a `Pointer` which is a link between `SynsetLinks`. This is a natural representation steming from the generality of the HyperGraphDB schema.

===Exceptions===

For each part of speech (noun, adjective, verb, adverb), WordNet contains a list of exceptional forms of the root lexeme. For nouns, this is usually the irregular plular forms, for adjectives and adverbs irregular superlatives, for verbs irregular conjugation. This is useful in morphological analysis where the normal rules for inflexion do not apply. Exception are represented in HGWN as links of type `ExcLink` and its sub-classes, one for reach part of speech. The first target of an exception link is the root word and the other targets are its exceptional forms. The links have an arity >= 2. Both root and exceptional forms are stored as lexemes in HyperGraphDB (i.e. as instances of the type `Word`).

==Loading WordNet in a HyperGraphDB==

The JWNL (Java WordNet Library) - http://sourceforge.net/projects/jwordnet is used to load the WordNet database files. It is an open-source Java API for accessing WordNet which provides API-level access to WordNet data.